Do you think?
NOTE CONF
So try to get attention or, uh.
Do it in the like.
NOTE CONF
Should I just start?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Should I?
Yeah, it's it is recorded.
NOTE CONF
So.
She should be on.
NOTE CONF
My test.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Hi, guys.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we're your student reps, and we're here to
voice your concerns and to, like, staff in the university.
NOTE CONF
Um, so one way that you can do this is
by scanning the QR code for our weekly feedback form.
NOTE CONF
So if you have any concerns, um, regarding university life
in general or anything that's just making your life harder
NOTE CONF
than it needs to be, you can just scan the
QR code and you can give us feedback so we
NOTE CONF
can relate that to staff in our weekly meetings.
We have also left our personal emails up there.
NOTE CONF
So if you have any other concerns, feel free to
like just send us a little email.
NOTE CONF
And is that all?
I think that's it from us.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Should we just come back here?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon from me.
So yesterday I was generalising sequence and we talked about
NOTE CONF
this idea where sequence can have not just one predicate
on the left or on the right, but can have
NOTE CONF
lists of predicates or sets of predicates.
When you do it In Haskell, it's a list, but
NOTE CONF
really it's a set.
And the principle of having sets of predicates is that
NOTE CONF
what's on the left is all the things that you're
assuming in order to get what's on the right, which
NOTE CONF
is a list of possibilities that you might be able
to prove.
NOTE CONF
And we spent some time arguing that the meaning of
this is the end of everything on the left entails
NOTE CONF
the order of everything on the right.
And I went on to try to justify this as
NOTE CONF
a useful thing to do, because in most pieces of
reasoning, in most proofs, then we have a bunch of
NOTE CONF
assumptions that are being carried around through most of the
proof and a specific assumption that we're actually working with
NOTE CONF
in order to try to prove B, although B might
actually need some of the assumptions in here, but these
NOTE CONF
might be something we assume all the time, and so
we don't normally want to think about them.
NOTE CONF
Any questions or requests for clarification or repetition of anything
that we did yesterday?
NOTE CONF
There's quite a lot of conceptual advance coming in yesterday
and today, so tutorial will hope we'll hopefully bed it
NOTE CONF
in two.
So I want to.
NOTE CONF
Just give an example.
Going back to something we did earlier.
NOTE CONF
You remember the the drinking age in Scotland thing at
the time I said it was a slightly odd example
NOTE CONF
because we did it in terms of rules and really
it's about sequence.
NOTE CONF
So here is how if I had written the book
the Buying Alcohol in Scotland example would be presented So
NOTE CONF
we've got a bunch of assumptions like people are over
18.
NOTE CONF
If you remember, I said that was a background assumption,
and I know there were a couple of people who
NOTE CONF
aren't hard on you.
We have a predicate saying if you're in Scotland, we
NOTE CONF
have a predicate saying it's daytime, and then we have
a conclusion, which is can you legally buy alcohol should
NOTE CONF
you wish to?
And as I remarked last time, there's a bit of
NOTE CONF
fast talking going on here because what is x?
X is really a triple involving a person and a
NOTE CONF
place and a time.
That's the situation we're talking about.
NOTE CONF
And what we are trying to conclude is whether in
that situation, that person at that time in that place
NOTE CONF
can legally buy alcohol.
And the assumption that is currently the state in Scottish
NOTE CONF
law is that you need to be over 18.
You need to be in Scotland, obviously.
NOTE CONF
and you need to be doing this in daytime, defined
as between 10 and 10.
NOTE CONF
And if that's the case, then you can legally buy
alcohol in Scotland.
NOTE CONF
And we're not actually talking about the rest of the
world.
NOTE CONF
So this is now one of these sequence with a
bunch of propositions, predicates on the left, all of which
NOTE CONF
are necessary.
And when we were presenting it in terms of rules,
NOTE CONF
we were talking about denying the conclusion and flipping things
back and forwards.
NOTE CONF
But if we think about it as a sequence which
is arguably more natural, we can also do the same.
NOTE CONF
So let's think about how contra position works for us
in this setting.
NOTE CONF
When we had just one predicate on the left, contra
position was negate and flip.
NOTE CONF
When we have multiple things, then contra position is negate
and flip.
NOTE CONF
But you only choose one of the things on the
left.
NOTE CONF
Not all of them.
So I can do, um, if you're 18 and you're
NOTE CONF
in Scotland and you can't legally buy alcohol, then it
must be Night-Time.
NOTE CONF
Or I can do a composition of L and S
and get.
NOTE CONF
If you're 18 and you can't legally buy alcohol and
it's daytime, then you must not be in Scotland.
NOTE CONF
And so on and so on.
So that's how quantal position worked before.
NOTE CONF
If you compare this sequence setting with the rule based
setting, you'll see that we're doing the same thing.
NOTE CONF
But what more can we do with multiple predicates on
the left.
NOTE CONF
So this comma here is really an.
And so therefore we can work out what would happen
NOTE CONF
if we wanted to do composition of two premises.
Suppose I wanted to take this thing and say, can
NOTE CONF
I take the conclusion and deny both the assumptions S
and D?
NOTE CONF
Well, I can work out what happens if I try
to do that, because comma is the same as and
NOTE CONF
so I could replace the comma by an and break
this down into two predicates a simple one and a
NOTE CONF
compound one.
And then I could do quantum position on l and
NOTE CONF
this s.
And so that's negate and flip L comes over to
NOTE CONF
the left and is negated d s and d goes
over to the right and negated.
NOTE CONF
What can I do with the thing on the right.
Well we have D Morgan's laws, which you are supposed
NOTE CONF
to remember from propositional logic, although I think only a
small proportion of you remembered seeing them, but the and
NOTE CONF
the not of the and is the author of the
nots.
NOTE CONF
Just remember that mantra.
So not s d is not s or not D
NOTE CONF
and comma on the right is just or so we
can break that down again into not S and not
NOTE CONF
d.
So actually I can take the L and I can
NOTE CONF
contra pose it with two predicates on the left.
And it still works.
NOTE CONF
I've done negate of the L and flipped it.
And I've negated both these predicates and flipped it.
NOTE CONF
So if I can do it for two, can I
do it for three?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
I mean the same.
NOTE CONF
Exactly the same argument works.
I just replace that comma by an and move the
NOTE CONF
whole thing over, and then I have the not of
the ans and that breaks down into the Or of
NOTE CONF
the nots and the ORS turn into commas.
Can anybody see.
NOTE CONF
Well okay, let's let's do the question as stated.
Can you say what's the general composition rules?
NOTE CONF
So in these sequence where I might have lots of
things on the left and lots of things on the
NOTE CONF
right.
What's the general statement of composition in the negate and
NOTE CONF
flip framework?
So when I had one it was just negate and
NOTE CONF
flip.
Now I've shown you that when we have several things
NOTE CONF
we might be able to do more than one.
So what would be the general statement of quantum position.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
We get a set of um, so I get a
NOTE CONF
set of, um, propositions and I'd like take the law
of that set in the answer set.
NOTE CONF
So yeah, that's not think about the all in the
end because contrary position as we did it didn't do
NOTE CONF
this argument explicitly.
So this is an argument justifying the quantum position works.
NOTE CONF
I want just the simple description of quantum position.
So before it was take two predicates negate and flip.
NOTE CONF
What's the simple description of the most general quantum position
I can do here?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Maybe.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we've got a couple of suggestions there.
NOTE CONF
So one is take any bunch of predicates on the
left, any bunch of predicates on the right, negate them
NOTE CONF
and flip them as I said okay.
Now I think you were saying something that follows from
NOTE CONF
that.
Um, take any set on the left, any set on
NOTE CONF
the right, negate the things and move them to the
other side.
NOTE CONF
What is a particularly boring set to negate and flip?
Yeah, the empty set.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so the empty set is simultaneously the most important
set.
NOTE CONF
And the most boring set.
It's the most important set because it's the set from
NOTE CONF
which we build the entire rest of the set theoretic
universe.
NOTE CONF
And obviously it's the most boring because it has nothing
in it.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So what happens if I choose a predicate here?
NOTE CONF
Um, on the right for you, and I choose the
empty set of predicates here, and I do negate and
NOTE CONF
flip.
This predicate is negated and move to the left.
NOTE CONF
There's nothing here to do.
So actually, the most general form of composition is choose
NOTE CONF
a bunch of predicates, even one or many.
Negate them and move them to the other side.
NOTE CONF
You don't even need to be swapping them.
You can just move predicates between left and right provided
NOTE CONF
you negate them.
Um, did that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
What?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Shall I move on to the board?
NOTE CONF
Most things are easier when they're slower.
The whole purpose of blackboards is to make things slow
NOTE CONF
enough to follow.
So before we started introducing multiple things.
NOTE CONF
Composition was.
Take the two predicates on each side, negate them and
NOTE CONF
flip them.
Now, I just argued that we could generalise this and
NOTE CONF
say.
Choose two predicates on one side and one on another
NOTE CONF
and negate and flip.
Okay, so that would give us a.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Did everybody follow up to that point?
NOTE CONF
Shout if you didn't need.
Need me to say more?
NOTE CONF
Or look at the slide again at your leisure.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so what we just did the final bit was
NOTE CONF
say, well, if I can choose any of these predicates
and any of these predicates and flip them around, I
NOTE CONF
could actually choose none of the things on the left
and one thing on the right.
NOTE CONF
And then I get.
The thing just by moving one predicate to the other
NOTE CONF
side and negating it.
And if you think about it, that's now the simplest
NOTE CONF
possible form of composition, taking one thing and moving it
to the other side and negating it and all other.
NOTE CONF
So the kind of composition we did previously is like
doing two of those at the same time.
NOTE CONF
So when I said negate and swap secretly, I knew
that we could express it as take this, negate it
NOTE CONF
and move it and take this, negate it and move
it.
NOTE CONF
But in the original setting, we had to have exactly
one predicate on each side, so we had to combine
NOTE CONF
the two moves into a single swap.
Now we can do things one at a time, which
NOTE CONF
is much more general and lets us do lots of
other good stuff.
NOTE CONF
Okay, can I take that as red for the moment?
All this stuff is moderately technical.
NOTE CONF
Thank you for the usual people.
Usual thumbs up.
NOTE CONF
Um, but it has to be gone through and the
tutorial will help if you're having a little difficulty following
NOTE CONF
it.
So what have I done?
NOTE CONF
What I've actually given you is the basic outline of
Gerhard Jensen's sequent calculus.
NOTE CONF
And while there are several forms of logical reasoning that
differ slightly in the way they present things, the sequent
NOTE CONF
calculus is one that is particularly easy to work with.
It's not necessarily the most natural, but it's the easiest
NOTE CONF
to work with, and you're going to be programming with
it.
NOTE CONF
So we want it to be easy to work with.
What are the key differences from the kind of Aristotelian
NOTE CONF
reasoning that we've done before?
Well, it talks about all kinds of logical formulae.
NOTE CONF
All have first order logic and not just the categorical
propositions.
NOTE CONF
And the other key difference is that it only deals
with entailment.
NOTE CONF
So we only prove that some assumptions prove a conclusion.
It doesn't have any way explicitly built into the system
NOTE CONF
of working with not entails.
So previously we used not entails in order to smuggle
NOTE CONF
existential statements in because in order to make an existential
statement, what we really said was it's not the case
NOTE CONF
that everything is the negative of the existential.
But in normal first order logic, we have the exists
NOTE CONF
quantifier as a primitive operation, and so we don't need
to smuggle it in as a negated for all, although
NOTE CONF
frequently we do, because it often makes the working easier.
Now, having said that, I'm going to give you sequent
NOTE CONF
calculus with all of logic.
Actually, for most of the course, I'm not going to
NOTE CONF
will just concentrate on the propositional fragment.
So in some ways we're now getting simpler.
NOTE CONF
Well, in very definite way we're actually doing simpler stuff
than syllogisms.
NOTE CONF
Um, but it can be extended and probably right at
the end of the course.
NOTE CONF
I will come back and talk about how we actually
deal with the full power of universal and existential quantification.
NOTE CONF
So this is now where you would come in to
most courses teaching logic, computer science.
NOTE CONF
You'd have done basic propositional logic, and then they would
not talk about syllogisms and jump in here and start
NOTE CONF
talking about this proof system.
So let me remind you of things that we've already
NOTE CONF
seen.
We argued yesterday that comma and end of the same
NOTE CONF
thing.
Well, actually we defined comma and and to be the
NOTE CONF
same thing.
And we also argued that this rule is sound.
NOTE CONF
If C gives you a and c gives you b,
then certainly C gives you both a and B.
NOTE CONF
And similarly with the or all on the right is
defined to be comma And we're forced to anyway.
NOTE CONF
And on the left, if you know that A gives
you C and B gives you C, then as long
NOTE CONF
as you have at least one of A and B,
then you get C.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is a warning about some notation.
So up to now we have been carefully using double
NOTE CONF
lines to say that the rules go backwards.
From now on, all the rules go backwards.
NOTE CONF
So just to make the slides less cluttered I'm going
to use a single line.
NOTE CONF
But everything from now on, unless specifically stated otherwise, is
backwards sound as well as forward sound.
NOTE CONF
Um, these are rules that only talk about a couple
of predicates.
NOTE CONF
We have all these assumptions that might be floating around
all the rest of the proof that you're dealing with.
NOTE CONF
So the most general statement of these things has the
bunch of current assumptions on the left.
NOTE CONF
And it also has a bunch of current anti assumptions
on the right.
NOTE CONF
This thing is always a bit strange.
So this is this stuff on the right is what
NOTE CONF
gets left out in some of the easier to understand,
but slightly harder to work with versions of logic.
NOTE CONF
Um, the only way really to get used to it
is to work with some examples.
NOTE CONF
But roughly the gamma is the stuff you're assuming, if
you like to think of it that way, you can
NOTE CONF
say it's the part of the universe that I'm working
inside.
NOTE CONF
Gamma is what's true, and I'm working inside gamma.
And then what's the delta?
NOTE CONF
Well, basically the delta is stuff in gamma that you've
moved to the other side as part of the proof.
NOTE CONF
So technically, the part of the universe that a comma
B gives you something a and B gives you something
NOTE CONF
is true in is where the stuff on the left
is true and all the stuff on the right is
NOTE CONF
false.
Um, you will find that when you work with proofs,
NOTE CONF
you just have to kind of follow the symbols.
The nice thing about the proofs that we're going to
NOTE CONF
be doing is that you do not have to think
so any kind of mathematical proof where it's completely automatic
NOTE CONF
and you don't have to think is a good thing,
because it means you can get the computer to do
NOTE CONF
it for you.
So these rules are about and and or any questions
NOTE CONF
about this most general form of them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Then just now we were talking about quantum position.
And we argue that it generalises to rules like this.
NOTE CONF
I can take a predicate on the right, and I
can negate it and move it to the left.
NOTE CONF
And I can take a predicate on the left, and
I can negate it and move it to the right.
NOTE CONF
Instantly notice that I've been giving these rules names.
So these things to the side are names of rules.
NOTE CONF
And these are customary names.
What do they mean?
NOTE CONF
The L stands for left and the R stands for
right.
NOTE CONF
So this is the rule that lets you do something
with and on the left.
NOTE CONF
And this is the rule that lets you do something
with and on the right.
NOTE CONF
So here do something means just split it apart with
commas.
NOTE CONF
Here doing something with the hand on the right means
introducing breaking it down into two subsidiary assumptions.
NOTE CONF
Similarly here this is not on the left.
What do I do with a not on the left?
NOTE CONF
What do I do with a not on the right?
Um, that's almost all the rules that we're going to
NOTE CONF
deal with.
But there's one more rule that we need.
NOTE CONF
Because although it's obvious, we have to say that it's
obvious.
NOTE CONF
And that's this rule.
So forget about the stuff at the beginning.
NOTE CONF
It just says every property implies itself, which is a
very basic principle.
NOTE CONF
It would be a bit sad if properties did not
imply themselves, but it has to be said because otherwise
NOTE CONF
we don't know it.
Um, so you have been doing quite a lot of
NOTE CONF
recursion in Haskell recently, right?
Fairly sure you have.
NOTE CONF
And when you do write a recursive function in Haskell,
there's always a base case.
NOTE CONF
Well, okay, almost always a base case that finishes it
off the simple case.
NOTE CONF
And then there are the complex cases that let you
build up the more complicated stuff.
NOTE CONF
And this rule that says A entails a is the
base case of many proofs.
NOTE CONF
Um, remember this notation?
We saw this in the existential assumption notation.
NOTE CONF
This rule here says from no assumptions at all.
We can prove that A entails a.
NOTE CONF
In other words, a entails A is just a fact
of the universe, and indeed not of the universe.
NOTE CONF
It's a fact of all universes.
Okay, so I'm going to get into some actual proofs
NOTE CONF
very soon now.
And this means we're actually going quite fast this year.
NOTE CONF
So any questions clarification.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Why am I doing proofs.
What's the point of proofs?
NOTE CONF
Well, we want to know whether formulae are true or
not.
NOTE CONF
Why do we want to know whether formulae are true?
Because we want to know whether the things that they
NOTE CONF
describe in the real world or in the real mathematical
world are true.
NOTE CONF
So we've been talking about valid syllogisms.
A valid syllogism is one that is true in every
NOTE CONF
universe.
And so a formula that is true in every universe
NOTE CONF
is something that is particularly useful, because it means we
can use it without having to worry about the details
NOTE CONF
of the universe at hand.
You will see the word tautology used.
NOTE CONF
In order to describe formulae that are universally valid.
Some people will make a pedantic distinction between being a
NOTE CONF
tautology and being universally valid.
I'm probably not going to be able to make the
NOTE CONF
pedantic distinctions, so I'm not going to try to explain
it.
NOTE CONF
Um, tautology basically means self proving or true of its
own, right?
NOTE CONF
What does it mean to prove that some formula A
is valid in every universe?
NOTE CONF
Well, if you remember from last time, the sequence that
says A is true is no.
NOTE CONF
Assumptions entail A.
There was a question on Piazza asking for further explanation
NOTE CONF
of that.
I hope that the further explanation I provided was useful,
NOTE CONF
and at least the further explanation I provided after I
had slept was useful.
NOTE CONF
And so what we're trying to do when we prove
that a formula is valid is to deduce enough.
NOTE CONF
No assumptions entail a.
And what I'm going to do is just show you
NOTE CONF
by example how we would go about doing this.
So here is a formula not P or Q and
NOTE CONF
not P or P.
Stare at that for a bit and see if you
NOTE CONF
agree with me that it is necessarily true.
Whatever P and Q are.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, this is true.
It is true.
NOTE CONF
The right hand side is two and it is false.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So it can be quite hard to look at formulas
like this and work out whether it's true or not.
NOTE CONF
But here the the easiest way to do is what's
just been said to break it down by cases.
NOTE CONF
Well, we've got P and we've got Q.
It's possible that both P and Q are important, but
NOTE CONF
actually they aren't.
So let's just look at what happens when P.
NOTE CONF
If P is true, then p is true and therefore
this or is true.
NOTE CONF
And so the whole thing is true.
If not, p is the case.
NOTE CONF
So p is false then well this is true.
But this is also true because not p or q
NOTE CONF
is true whatever q is.
So basically we have true and true or false which
NOTE CONF
is true.
So whatever values p and q have this is a
NOTE CONF
tautology.
You could do this by truth tables if you wanted
NOTE CONF
to.
So when you did propositional logic at school, if you
NOTE CONF
did it in your school computer science, you would have
done this kind of thing with truth tables.
NOTE CONF
But we're going to do it by proving it from
no assumptions, using only sound principles of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
So.
And this is one of the most challenging pieces of
NOTE CONF
type setting in the course.
This is what we're trying to prove.
NOTE CONF
We want to prove from no assumptions that this formula
holds over here on the right.
NOTE CONF
I've set out the entire list of rules that we
might be able to use.
NOTE CONF
Now, I said that we don't have to think so,
since we don't have to think you can do the
NOTE CONF
thinking for me.
So looking at this formula, what can I do to
NOTE CONF
it to try to break it down and work up
to things with no assumptions at all?
NOTE CONF
Uh, wait a moment.
I just want to see if anybody else is going
NOTE CONF
to come in further back.
No.
NOTE CONF
Go ahead.
So what.
NOTE CONF
Should we what.
Should we do?
NOTE CONF
Uh.
So there's a suggestion to do.
NOTE CONF
Exchange, to flip, to negate it and move it over.
Um, no, because that makes it more complicated.
NOTE CONF
Puts more, puts another symbol in front of the formula.
So the idea of taking a formula and proving it
NOTE CONF
is always to try to break it down into smaller
and smaller components until you've broken it down into no
NOTE CONF
components at all, which is no assumptions.
So you should always be looking for ways to make
NOTE CONF
the formula smaller.
As we go up using the rules, we're trying to
NOTE CONF
break the formula down.
It's like doing a Haskell recursion.
NOTE CONF
You've got a big data structure.
You break it down.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
We know.
NOTE CONF
What the bracket.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
So you're saying this is not the policy?
Yep.
NOTE CONF
I mean, we're not doing any arguments about whether things
are true.
NOTE CONF
We're trying we're constructing a proof.
So this is purely syntactic manipulation.
NOTE CONF
But the key point here is the one that you've
made that if we look at this formula it's P
NOTE CONF
or something.
So what's the the top level of the formula.
NOTE CONF
Um you don't know what syntax trees are I think.
Does anybody know what a syntax tree is?
NOTE CONF
No.
You're going to learn them.
NOTE CONF
So if you think about how you would represent this
formula inside a computer as a Haskell programmer, as a
NOTE CONF
Haskell programmer, Haskell program.
You as a programmer would write something like.
NOTE CONF
This.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
So what I've done there is just take the formula
and represent it as a Haskell data structure, basically.
NOTE CONF
So and is an operator that takes two 4 million.
One on the left, one on the right.
NOTE CONF
Um.
And so when we look at a formula like this,
NOTE CONF
we say that the or here is.
When it's written as an or.
NOTE CONF
Is the outermost or the the topmost connective in the
formula.
NOTE CONF
It's basically looking at the brackets.
If you look at the formula at the most abstract
NOTE CONF
level, it's P or something else.
What is or.
NOTE CONF
Well this is an all on the right of a
formula.
NOTE CONF
What can we do with an all on the right
of a formula.
NOTE CONF
Comma.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We've got a rule for or on the right here
which says that when we see A or B on
NOTE CONF
the right, we can replace the or with a comma.
So that's what I've done there.
NOTE CONF
Or has just turned into a comma.
So notice this is braindead.
NOTE CONF
There was actually only one thing we could do here.
If you look at any of the other rules, they
NOTE CONF
don't apply.
Um, what's the next thing I can do?
NOTE CONF
So now I'm looking at this formula where I've broken
it down into this bit and this bit.
NOTE CONF
What's the topmost connective.
What's the outer connective in this formula?
NOTE CONF
I'm hearing some things but shout, shout a bit louder.
And so it's not P and some stuff.
NOTE CONF
Um it's an and it's on the right.
I've got a rule that says what I can do
NOTE CONF
with and on the right.
If I see A and B on the right, then
NOTE CONF
I have to split my proof into two sub proofs.
So notice what's going on here.
NOTE CONF
I'm trying to prove this.
And when I do the introduction of this rule, I'm
NOTE CONF
creating a sub proof on the left to deal with
a and a sub proof on the right to deal
NOTE CONF
with B.
So here I'm going to have to try to prove
NOTE CONF
not P there and not P or Q here.
And as always, this p here is being carried along
NOTE CONF
because the rule here says the delta, all the rest
of the stuff on the right is unchanged.
NOTE CONF
So I look at the formula I'm concerned with.
I apply the rule to it and move it back
NOTE CONF
up.
What am I going to do next?
NOTE CONF
Now I've got two things to deal with.
One of them is slightly easier than the other.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Uh, you want to do me to deal with.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
That's all on the right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay, so if I look at this one, this says,
NOTE CONF
remember comma on the left.
On the right means or so this is saying not
NOTE CONF
p or p.
That's pretty true.
NOTE CONF
So we should be able to prove that.
But in order to prove it using the rules we
NOTE CONF
have to flip one of these to the left so
we can take not P and flip it to the
NOTE CONF
left.
That leaves me trying to prove that P entails P.
NOTE CONF
Well, that was the base case that I assume introduced.
So on this side of the proof, we're finished.
NOTE CONF
No assumptions left on this side of the proof.
What happens?
NOTE CONF
Now I have to deal with or I have all
on the right.
NOTE CONF
I have a rule for dealing with or on the
right.
NOTE CONF
I have to break it down again.
But instead I've chosen to do.
NOTE CONF
No.
I saw it all on the right.
NOTE CONF
I break it down into commas.
So now I have not P or p.
NOTE CONF
Well, this is exactly the same as that, except it's
got some other junk that I don't care about, so
NOTE CONF
I can do exactly the same.
P entails P or Q, and that's part of the
NOTE CONF
identity rule because q here is the delta.
Look at what the identity rule says.
NOTE CONF
It says if you have a the same thing on
the left and the right, and any old junk on
NOTE CONF
the left and any old junk on the right, then
you're done.
NOTE CONF
So here we have p entails P and some junk
that we don't care about.
NOTE CONF
So now we have a proof which starts with no
assumptions, because there's nothing above the line either here or
NOTE CONF
here.
And working forward, we see the rules.
NOTE CONF
Give us the conclusion.
So that's the structure of a proof in a modern
NOTE CONF
sequence calculus, which is a particularly formal version of a
proof in the same style that you do in mathematics,
NOTE CONF
but purely symbolic.
So you can see that it makes sense.
NOTE CONF
So that was your first proper proof.
From a computer scientists point of view.
NOTE CONF
How much sense did it make?
Okay, I can see some sense.
NOTE CONF
I seem a bit of sense.
Anybody?
NOTE CONF
Definitely.
in the not very much sense at all.
NOTE CONF
So I don't necessarily expect it to make sense to
everybody right now because it's a very formal manipulation.
NOTE CONF
But I want to emphasise again the fact that I
didn't have to do much thinking.
NOTE CONF
At almost every case, there was very little choice about
what to do next.
NOTE CONF
So here, for example, when I look at this thing,
I mean, I can always negate and flip.
NOTE CONF
I can always move things from one side to the
other.
NOTE CONF
But here I see an or so that tells me
I apply the all.
NOTE CONF
And that means that you can go away and program
it, which I believe you may be doing at some
NOTE CONF
point.
So that's what I said.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We have a couple of possibilities at this point because
I have another, more complicated proof.
NOTE CONF
This is probably enough to be doing the tutorial, although
you will need to work a bit more on it.
NOTE CONF
So would you prefer to stop now?
And you need to work a bit to do the
NOTE CONF
tutorial, or to go through the even more complex stuff
later?
NOTE CONF
The alternative is we leave the slightly more complex stuff
until next week.
NOTE CONF
And don't leave it to next week.
Right.
NOTE CONF
But then the number of people who are expressing that
view is the kind of people I would expect to
NOTE CONF
say that, and there might be a silent majority.
This is where I need to clap, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
But I haven't learned how to use woohoo clap, so
we're not getting a woohoo clap.
NOTE CONF
How about we do it both ways?
I go through it relatively fast now, but then we
NOTE CONF
come back to it next week because it will almost
certainly need some reinforcement.
NOTE CONF
And you might possibly want to see this stuff in
order to do the tutorial.
NOTE CONF
The level of talk.
I mean, I'm sure you're all talking about the proofs
NOTE CONF
going on, but the level of talk is getting loud
enough that I'm finding it a bit difficult to hear
NOTE CONF
myself think.
And I often find that when I say that people
NOTE CONF
haven't even been listening to what I've been saying for
the last two minutes, because otherwise they would shut up.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So in general, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So talking about things here, but do remember that you
are surprisingly loud to the people around you, and you
NOTE CONF
should maybe try to talk at a volume that doesn't
interfere with the people next to you and behind you.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I want to show you another example of
using proofs.
NOTE CONF
So often when we try to prove something, we don't
know whether it's actually true or not.
NOTE CONF
It may not be a tautology, it may not be
valid, and it may be that we try to prove
NOTE CONF
it and we find that there's a bunch of assumptions.
And then that's useful because we know what we need
NOTE CONF
to assume if we ever need to use this piece
of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
Now, this is a bit kind of boring because these
are propositional statements.
NOTE CONF
And so nothing is very interesting.
Um, but if I give you that and say, stare
NOTE CONF
at it and tell me whether it's a tautology, how
long are we going to be here?
NOTE CONF
Too long.
Right?
NOTE CONF
You could do it by truth tables, but I can't
stare at that and work out whether it's or tautology
NOTE CONF
in less than about five minutes or maybe two minutes
here on a good day.
NOTE CONF
But if I try to do a proof of it,
I will get out of the proof.
NOTE CONF
The answer as to whether it's a tautology and if
it isn't, I'll find out what I need to assume.
NOTE CONF
So here's another long and fancy proof, and I think
this one even has some pretty colours in it to
NOTE CONF
make it even clearer than the last one.
Um, this is a nasty long formula.
NOTE CONF
You probably have difficulty counting the brackets.
I have difficulty counting the brackets right now.
NOTE CONF
So to make it clearer, this is the outermost connective
in that formula.
NOTE CONF
It's got this on the left or this on the
right.
NOTE CONF
When I see an all on the right, then what
I do is use the all rule to break it
NOTE CONF
down into two separate formulae, which I can deal with
separately.
NOTE CONF
So that gives me now a choice.
I could look at the left hand, the first formula
NOTE CONF
on the right.
The outermost connective of that one is a negation.
NOTE CONF
I could look at the formula, the second formula where
the outermost connective is an Or.
NOTE CONF
Do you think it matters which one I do first?
No it doesn't.
NOTE CONF
So in some more general cases it can make proofs
longer if you do the wrong one first.
NOTE CONF
So there's a kind of heuristic that sometimes it makes
life easier.
NOTE CONF
But in general these are going to be completely, well,
more or less independent operations.
NOTE CONF
What I've actually chosen to do is deal with the
negation.
NOTE CONF
So by looking at this negation, I flipped that whole
thing over to the other side, and I remove the
NOTE CONF
negation so strictly.
This is a double negation.
NOTE CONF
Negation flip means removing a negation.
So now I've got a slightly more balanced formula.
NOTE CONF
And now I have some choice about what to do
again.
NOTE CONF
What choices do I have here?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So I've got an and on the left and I've
got an oil on the right.
NOTE CONF
Both of those are things I replaced by commas.
Now technically I have to do this in two steps
NOTE CONF
because we have one rule for or and another rule
for.
NOTE CONF
And that's boring right.
And it needs writing.
NOTE CONF
And I hate writing.
So I'm quite happy for you in proofs that you
NOTE CONF
write down to take two obvious steps and do them
at the same time.
NOTE CONF
So I talked previously about the laziness of programmers, mathematicians,
or at least as lazy as programmers.
NOTE CONF
So here I'm doing an all on the right and
an and on the left, and I'm just writing them
NOTE CONF
down in the same rule, although technically it should be
two rules.
NOTE CONF
Um, what am I left with?
Any bets on what I should do next?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, there's a bunch of things I could do.
NOTE CONF
I'm actually going to choose that one because it's the
first thing.
NOTE CONF
So I've got an all on the left, and that
means I have to break it down into two separate
NOTE CONF
sub proofs again.
Um, notice that this is now getting quite complicated with
NOTE CONF
the gammas and deltas, the junk we're not currently dealing
with.
NOTE CONF
Here's the formula that I'm working on.
This is junk on the left and this is junk
NOTE CONF
on the right.
So this formula here is left unchanged.
NOTE CONF
This stuff on the right is left unchanged when I
apply the rule.
NOTE CONF
So that's why we express these rules in terms of
the gammas and deltas.
NOTE CONF
They just sweep up the stuff we're not currently working
with.
NOTE CONF
So now I've broken this down with a not A
and a not B.
NOTE CONF
Now obviously I'm probably going to do the same again
because I can do exactly the same with an oar
NOTE CONF
here.
Breaks it down into not C and B.
NOTE CONF
And now I have a bunch of stuff which I
can't prove.
NOTE CONF
Um, because I can't prove that not B, that B
and not C entails not A and C, and I
NOTE CONF
can't prove that B entails c.
Can I simplify it at all?
NOTE CONF
Well, I've got two B's here.
That's a bit silly.
NOTE CONF
I've got an A here.
Um, maybe I don't want the A so I can
NOTE CONF
just move it over to make it look more straightforward.
But this isn't doing any useful work.
NOTE CONF
It's just removing a few symbols, and I can do
the same negations over here.
NOTE CONF
So now I've moved that C over to here and
absorbed it into that C.
NOTE CONF
So on the right hand side of the proof here,
I've ended up with assumptions A and B entail C.
NOTE CONF
I needed it there and I need it there, and
now I'm stuck.
NOTE CONF
I can't do any more proving because there's just nothing
more to prove what happens on this side.
NOTE CONF
Well, that's actually true because I've got a not a
here and not a here.
NOTE CONF
So there is, um, the identity rule that says this
is simply true.
NOTE CONF
So here I've got something where I'm trying to prove
that this is all tautology, but I can't because I
NOTE CONF
get stuck in the proof.
The fact that I get stuck in the proof needing
NOTE CONF
to prove these tells me that this assumption is necessary
in order for this to be true.
NOTE CONF
So what I've learned from here is that this tautology
requires that A or b, sorry a and b entails
NOTE CONF
C, and by flipping to the left you can say
it.
NOTE CONF
Alternatively, As if I know that A is false and
B is false, and C is true, then this formula
NOTE CONF
is true.
So actually it's not much of a tautology at all.
NOTE CONF
It has some very specific assumptions on what needs to
be true.
NOTE CONF
Only one circumstance.
You could alternatively, of course do this by truth tables,
NOTE CONF
in which case you would find that there's just this
one row of the truth table where the formula is
NOTE CONF
actually true.
Okay, we'll come back to this and do it again
NOTE CONF
next week after the tutorial.
But let me just summarise in the last couple of
NOTE CONF
slides what the point of these things is.
So assumptions give you counterexamples.
NOTE CONF
What I did just now is to show that this
whole formula requires this to be true.
NOTE CONF
So a counterexample to the formula is any anywhere where
this top thing is false.
NOTE CONF
For example something where A is true and b is
true and c is false.
NOTE CONF
And finally, something for you to think about before we
come back to this next week.
NOTE CONF
I've shown you that if you have a tautology, you
the proof succeeds, and every leaf at the top of
NOTE CONF
the proof is an eye rule.
So there are no assumptions.
NOTE CONF
If you try to prove a non tautology, you get
leaves with assumptions which are needed to make the thing
NOTE CONF
true.
Find out what happens when you try to prove something
NOTE CONF
that is always false.
So before next time, do this very simple proof and
NOTE CONF
then come back and tell me what you think about
it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, good luck with the tutorial.
We will come back and do this again next week.
NOTE CONF
And then on Friday next week we'll have an examples
class.
NOTE CONF
So come with problems on Friday.